URL: https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/
Save time while PyCharm takes care of the routine. Focus on the bigger things and embrace
                            the keyboard-centric approach to get the most of PyCharm's many productivity
                            features.PyCharm knows everything about your code. Rely on it for intelligent code completion,
                            on-the-fly error checking and quick-fixes, easy project navigation, and much
                            more.Write neat and maintainable code while the IDE helps you keep control of the quality with
                        PEP8 checks, testing assistance, smart refactorings, and a host of inspections.PyCharm is designed by programmers, for programmers, to provide all the tools you need
                        for productive Python development.PyCharm provides smart code completion, code inspections, on-the-fly error highlighting and
                        quick-fixes, along with automated code refactorings and rich navigation capabilities.
                    PyCharm offers great framework-specific support for modern web development frameworks such as
                        Django, Flask, Google App Engine, Pyramid, and web2py.PyCharm integrates with IPython Notebook, has an interactive Python console, and supports
                        Anaconda as well as multiple scientific packages including matplotlib and NumPy.In addition to Python, PyCharm supports JavaScript, CoffeeScript, TypeScript, Cython, SQL,
                        HTML/CSS, template languages, AngularJS, Node.js, and more.Run, debug, test, and deploy applications on remote hosts or virtual machines, with remote
                        interpreters, an integrated ssh terminal, and Docker and Vagrant integration.A huge collection of tools out of the box: an integrated debugger and test runner; Python
                        profiler; a built-in terminal; and integration with major VCS and built-in Database Tools.
                    Have you ever wanted to learn programming with Python? Or maybe you're using Python to teach programming?
                        Then we have the perfect tool for you.Michael KennedyHost, Talk Python to Me Podcast
                    Founder Talk Python Training
                
                    I'm in the unique position of asking over 100 industry experts the following question on my Talk
                    Python To Me podcast. "When you write some Python code, what editor do you open up?" While the
                    answers vary, it is frequently PyCharm. The reasons the guests give are usually the same reasons
                    I've been a PyCharm advocate for years.
                PyCharm deeply understands your project, not just individual filesRefactoring is a breeze across an entire projectThe built-in SQL tooling is amazingAutocomplete works better than any other editor, by farThat's just a few reasons I open PyCharm daily to build my web properties and manage the software that runs my business.Cory AlthoffAuthor of The Self-Taught Programmer: The Definitive Guide to Programming Professionally
                        PyCharm is the best IDE I've ever used. With PyCharm, you can access the command line, connect to a database, create a virtual environment, and manage your version control system all in one place, saving time by avoiding constantly switching between windows. I couldn't imagine going back to programming without PyCharm's local history feature and debugger. Add the rest of its convenient shortcuts and features, and you have the perfect IDE.
                    If you care about keeping your commit history clean, you’re definitely familiar with interactive rebasing. We’ve now made this easier, and more graphical.Go exactly where you want to go during debugging! When you ‘step into’, the IDE will ask you exactly which call to investigate further.To make development better, we’ve designed a font specifically for development. JetBrains Mono has increased character height for better vertical legibility, and comes with code ligatures.