URL: https://www.lakeheadu.ca/programs/undergraduate-programs/computer-science
Computer science plays a leading role in modern society, shaping our abilities and our future. From streaming music to planning a mission to Mars, the application of computer science offers innovative approaches to new challenges.Think big as you explore the world of computer science while engaging in one of two focused program streams in Business or Science. The Business Focus provides a path to the Entrepreneurship Certificate from the Faculty of Business, whereas the Science Focus emphasizes Science and Environmental Science electives.Experience high-tech labs and classrooms, access to a 240-core high performance computer Linux cluster, a stunning 3-D virtual reality lab, and learn about the latest advances in game programming, mobile computing, health informatics applications, big data, and cloud computing.It’s easy to transfer to Lakehead. Our pathway and general transfer policies are designed to help you maximize your credits from your current or previous studies at either college or university – or even both.  There are a number of ways to transfer to Lakehead. Let us help you achieve your degree completion goals. For more information regarding specific admission requirements from college or university, check out the “Admissions Requirement” tab above and select your most recent level of study. To determine your general admission requirements, select one of the definitions below:*Higher averages may be required for admission to programs in which the demand for places by qualified applicants exceeds the supply of available spaces.**Admission averages are calculated using the top 6 Grade 12 U or M courses.  *Higher averages may be required for admission to programs in which the demand for places by qualified applicants exceeds the supply of available spaces.Note: Meeting the minimum admission requirements is not a guarantee of admission.College transfer applicants who are applying to a program that does not have a college transfer pathway are eligible for admission consideration if they have:To determine your program-specific prerequisite requirements, choose from the drop-down menus below:The program-specific prerequisite requirements do not apply to college transfer pathways. Refer to the agreements found here for more information on the admission requirements.If you do not meet the program-specific prerequisite requirements for your program of choice, please contact Enrolment Services – Undergraduate Admissions to schedule an appointment with an Admissions Officer. An Admissions Officer can provide you with more information on how to enrol in the required prerequisite courses for your program of choice. Now that you have determined your admission requirements, your next step is to submit an application.If you are interested in full-time studies, you can apply to Lakehead University using the Ontario Universities’ Application Centre (OUAC). The full-time applications can be found here. Before submitting your application, be sure to read the application instructions to ensure that you are using the correct application.If you are interested in part-time studies, you can apply to Lakehead University using the Undergraduate Application form found  here. Before submitting your application, be sure to read the application instructions to ensure that you are using the correct application.Your first year academic experience will depend on whether you've enrolled in the Business or Science stream, and if you've chosen to pursue our co-operative education program. Business Focus (required courses)Computer Science 1411 and 1431 – Computer Programming I & IIBusiness 1512 – Basics of AccountingBusiness 1511 – Basics of ManagementMathematics 1171 – Calculus I Mathematics 1271 – Discrete Mathematics One-credit combination of English, History, or PhilosophyScience Focus (required courses)Computer Science 1411 and 1431 – Computer Programming I & IIMathematics 1171 – Calculus IMathematics 1271 – Discrete Mathematics One-credit combination of English, History, or PhilosophyIf you're pursuing our co-operative education program, you may have a formal work period assignment in the summers after first and second year (Computer Science 1990, 2990) at the discretion of the Chair of the department. Otherwise, formal work period assignments do not begin until winter term of third year.Co-op PlacementDuring your undergrad you will have the opportunity to participate in our co-operative education program to gain rewarding experiences in the industry, acquire practical skills and earn an income to finance your education. We have placed over 700 students with industry partners including IBM, Environment Canada, RIM, Atomic Energy of Canada, the Canadian Grain Commission, CIBC and more. Student MentorshipWe have a full-time faculty member who is dedicated to mentoring first and second year students’ programming skills. This resource is particularly useful if you have limited experience in computer programming and would like one-on-one time with an expert in the field outside of your class and lab time. SpecializationWe offer a unique Game Programming Specialization to all Computer Science majors. This specialization teaches you the intricacies of animation, two and three dimensional graphics, gameplay and much more while you develop single, multiplayer and mobile games.  Accessible Faculty Our department is small enough to provide you with direct access to the professors, and individual access to advanced computing equipment. Our faculty is active in its research, and committed to balancing theoretical information with hands-on opportunities. Projects and research papers are regularly integrated into our undergraduate courses.First Year LU-GC Students (All programs - Except Engineering):* The LUSU Medical/Dental Insurance (SMEDF) policy is effective September 1, for the 12 months ending August 31. All full-time undergraduate students who have registered in 3.75 or more FCEs by the last day to register in September are automatically assessed this mandatory fee. Should a student have comparable coverage and choose to opt-out they may do so by going to the LUSU Website at www.lusu.ca and clicking on opt-out to proceed. No exceptions or extensions. Opting out does not remove the fee from your student account. For additional information regarding LUSU services including Medical and Dental please go to www.lusu.ca or contact LUSU directly by phone (807) 343-8259 Co-op students and Graduate students are not covered but may purchase the Plan.** The Barrie Campus U-Pass (Bus Pass) Fee (SLBUB):  All full-time undergraduate students who have registered in 3.75 or more FCEs by the last day to register in September are automatically assessed this mandatory fee.* The LUSU Medical/Dental Insurance (SMEDF) policy is effective September 1, for the 12 months ending August 31. All full-time undergraduate students who have registered in 3.75 or more FCEs by the last day to register in September are automatically assessed this mandatory fee. Should a student have comparable coverage and choose to opt-out they may do so by going to the LUSU Website at www.lusu.ca and clicking on opt-out to proceed. No exceptions or extensions. Opting out does not remove the fee from your student account. For additional information regarding LUSU services including Medical and Dental please go to www.lusu.ca or contact LUSU directly by phone (807) 343-8259 Co-op students and Graduate students are not covered but may purchase the Plan.** The LUSU Bus Pass Fee (SLBUS):  All full-time undergraduate students who have registered in 3.75 or more FCEs by the last day to register in September are automatically assessed this mandatory fee.* The LUSU Medical/Dental Insurance (SMEDF) policy is effective September 1, for the 12 months ending August 31. All full-time undergraduate students who have registered in 3.75 or more FCEs by the last day to register in September are automatically assessed this mandatory fee. Should a student have comparable coverage and choose to opt-out they may do so by going to the LUSU Website at www.lusu.ca and clicking on opt-out to proceed. No exceptions or extensions. Opting out does not remove the fee from your student account. For additional information regarding LUSU services including Medical and Dental please go to www.lusu.ca or contact LUSU directly by phone (807) 343-8259 Co-op students and Graduate students are not covered but may purchase the Plan.** The LUSU Bus Pass Fee (SLBUO):  All full-time undergraduate students who have registered in 3.75 or more FCEs by the last day to register in September are automatically assessed this mandatory fee. First Year Students* The LUSU Medical/Dental Insurance (SMEDF) policy is effective September 1, for the 12 months ending August 31. All full-time undergraduate students who have registered in 3.75 or more FCEs by the last day to register in September are automatically assessed this mandatory fee. Should a student have comparable coverage and choose to opt-out they may do so by going to the LUSU Website at www.lusu.ca and clicking on opt-out to proceed. No exceptions or extensions. Opting out does not remove the fee from your student account. For additional information regarding LUSU services including Medical and Dental please go to www.lusu.ca or contact LUSU directly by phone (807) 343-8259 Co-op students and Graduate students are not covered but may purchase the Plan.** The Georgian/Barrie Bus Pass Fee (SLBUB):  All full-time undergraduate students who have registered in 3.75 or more FCEs by the last day to register in September are automatically assessed this mandatory fee.  Lakehead University respectfully acknowledges its campuses are located on the traditional lands of Fort William First Nation, Signatory to the Robinson Superior Treaty of 1850 and the Ojibwe, Odawa, and Pottawatomi nations, collectively known as the Three Fires Confederacy.