URL: https://www.concordia.ca/academics/undergraduate/computer-science.html
Concordia Universityhttps://www.concordia.ca/content/concordia/en/academics/undergraduate/computer-science.htmlREAD MORENot sure if any of the specialized options are for you? Want to have the freedom to choose from the full range of Computer Science electives and to select the individual classes that are of greatest interest to you? The General Program option may be just what you are looking for. Apart from the standard Computer Science core, students in the General Option are free to select courses that focus on algorithms, hardware, gaming, networking, artificial intelligence, or just about anything else the department offers. Our state-of-the-art labs for high-performance computing, networks and artificial intelligence will give you experience with the equipment you’ll use in the field. Through labs, lectures and projects, you’ll also:A Bachelor of Computer Science degree takes a minimum of three or four years (90 – 120 credits) of full-time study, depending on your academic background. The core provides a basic and broad study of theory, mathematical basics, programming methodology, computer architecture, data structures, operating systems, and software engineering.Electives allow you to take a maximum of 12 credits from any one of Computer Games Electives, Web Services and Applications Electives, Computer Systems Electives, or Software Systems Core.
We offer an honours program to computer science students with high academic standing. You may apply to the honours program once you have completed 30 credits.CEGEP students
Admission is based on applicants’ overall Math and Physics (if applicable) CRC indicated above and completion of the following classes as part of their DEC.Students completing a three-year technical DEC in a related field may also be eligible for admission without the specified profile provided they achieve a minimum overall CRC as indicated above and preferably a minimum of 24 in math and physics course(s) required for their CEGEP program. Students may be eligible for exemptions/transfer credits based on course equivalencies.IB applicants
Math HL preferred but SL is acceptable. SL grade requirement may vary. Science HL or SL acceptable.University transfers and mature students
Applicants who meet the minimum entry requirements are encouraged to apply and may still be considered for admission, provided they have completed the majority of the prerequisite courses. Transfer credits may be considered on a course-by-course basis.Prerequisites for university transfer applicants
The following courses are required in addition to the program and may be completed at another post-secondary institution prior to admission or at Concordia.You must meet Concordia’s minimum admission requirements.Honours option available in all Computer Science programs. Students may apply to the Honours program once they have completed 30 credits and have maintained a GPA of 3.00Physics is not required for entry to Computer Science Programs, except for Computer Systems.Minimum cut-off averages should be used as indicators. The cut-off data may change depending on the applicant pool. Applicants who meet the stated minimum requirements are not guaranteed admission to these programs.We consider complete applications year round and we give priority to applicants who apply by official deadlines. Late applications will be considered if places are still available for the fall term only.We reserve the right to close admission to a program at any time after the official deadline without prior notice.
  Core coursesElectivesSee full curriculum details in the Undergraduate Calendar.Sample classesSee all classes and read course descriptions.Course sequences
See the course sequences for the General Program.The Co-op program gives you the chance to complete paid work terms that last 12 to 16 weeks. As a Co-op student, you will assist in projects designed and implemented by professionals and may also:Co-op students have completed work terms for employers such as McKesson Canada and NeuroRx Research.Read more about the Co-op programGiven the range of applications in use today, computer science alumni have established careers in a range of sectors including health care, communications, manufacturing, banking, retail, electronics and entertainment.A US Federal Student Aid-eligible version of this program is offered. This version meets all US regulations (such as no co-operative education or e-courses) for eligible programs.© Concordia University
Ask a question

Campus tours

Events near you

Create a profile
Programs
Requirements
Costs & financial aid
University life
Apply
VisitConcordia University
Undergraduate Admissions
Application Centre
P.O. Box 2900
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
H3G 2S2