URL: https://uwaterloo.ca/future-students/programs/computer-science
Visit our COVID-19 Information website for information on our response to the pandemic.Study at one of the world’s best schools for computer science, where more than 80 professors are pushing the boundaries of the field.With 70+ computer science courses, plus no end of options and electives, you can create a degree tailored to your specific interests. After first year, you can choose a major in Data Science.You can also gain two years of paid work experience through our co-op program, the largest of its kind in North America, or fast track your degree by choosing the regular system of study.Your degree is your ticket to career success. Our graduates go on to work in leading technology companies and at top universities around the world.Meanwhile, Waterloo professors and graduates have created more than 800 spin-off companies, including leaders like OpenText, Canada’s largest software company.Through Waterloo’s Computer Science Club, get access to high-powered hardware or get social with your fellow students.Bring your ideas to life at Hack the North — Canada’s biggest hackathon — which attracts more than 1,000 students from around the world each year.The David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science is largest academic computer science research centre in Canada, ranking 10th in North America and 31st in the world.First faculty of mathematics in North AmericaAvailable as a co-op and regular programEarn a Bachelor of Computer Science or Bachelor of MathematicsOntario students: six Grade 12 U and/or M courses includingRecommended: Grade 11 U Introduction to Computer ScienceAdmission average: Individual selection from the low 90sComplete the Admission Information Form once you've applied.Not an Ontario high school student? Search our admission requirements.We strongly encourage you to participate in the Canadian Computing Competition, Canadian Senior Mathematics Contest (CSMC), and/or the Euclid Mathematics Contest to enhance your admissions status. To be considered for entrance scholarships in the Faculty of Mathematics, you must write the CSMC or the Euclid. If you complete both contests, we'll use the results of the contest in which you performed best.For September 2020, participating in the Euclid Mathematics Contest is NOT required for admission or for a scholarship. You will not be penalised in any way for not participating in the Euclid this year.Sign up for insider advice that can help you now and in the future. Topics include   Sign up forTips from current studentsYou can choose advanced-stream courses for algebra, calculus, and computer science if you meet the requirements. The majority of the required courses you’ll take will be Computer Science courses, with additional courses in the Faculty of Mathematics. With your remaining classes, you can choose electives from many of the 100 subject areas at Waterloo.View a list of all the courses required for your degree.CS 341 - AlgorithmsCS 480 - Introduction to Machine LearningCS 492 - The Social Implications of ComputingCS 486 - Introduction to Artificial IntelligenceBy alternating school terms and paid co-op work terms throughout your degree, you can explore new career areas and types of employers as your career interests evolve. You can choose from 4 different co-op sequences.Waterloo is an international leader in mathematicsApply directly to this program on your applicationOffered by the Faculty of MathematicsYou can add additional areas of expertise by including one or more of the minors available to all Waterloo students. Graduates typically pursue careers in technology such as software development and game development. They often work for software companies, technology companies, and more.Learn about the future of careers in math, coding, and data.ProgramsCo-op at WaterlooCampus tours and eventsAdmission requirementsHow to applyTips and advice from Waterloo studentsWe acknowledge that we live, study, and work on the traditional territory of the Neutral, Anishinaabeg, and Haudenosaunee peoples. The University of Waterloo is situated on the Haldimand Tract, the land promised to the Six Nations that includes six miles on each side of the Grand River. Our active work toward reconciliation takes place across our campuses through research, learning, teaching, and community building, and is centralized within our Indigenous Initiatives Office.