URL: https://ontariotechu.ca/programs/science/computer-science-regular-and-co-op.php
Contact usServices and informationSafety and securityStudentsResearch FacilitiesGiving at Ontario TechOur faculty and students are at the leading edge of research in Canada, developing innovative solutions to today’s complex problems. Your support is building a better world.Donate nowComputer science is the study of software, algorithms and computing. Our program explores a breadth of computing fundamentals, including data structures, graphics, information visualization, human-computer interfaces, software quality, programming, artificial intelligence, databases, data analytics, machine vision and more. Pursue your studies in the Honours Computer Science program, or chose to specialize in one of the following areas:This specialization is in response to the urgent need for data scientists capable of turning vast quantities of data into insight. You will develop the necessary problem-solving, critical thinking, analytical, computational and communication skills to meet employers’ needs. Graduates will be highly sought after in a variety of industries, including health care, finance and business consulting.The Digital Media specialization covers topics such as computer graphics, information visualization, human-computer interaction, machine vision and mobile development. You will study the underlying technologies used in computer games, educational software, mobile devices and other forms of digital media through the science that informs it. This option is especially suitable for students who are directly interested in digital media or a related field. If you are interested in managerial and leadership roles, consider applying for the five-year Bachelor of Science and Management (Honours) program in your upper years of study. Graduates gain a solid foundation in the key functional areas of business and management, including finance, accounting, operations, project management and marketing.There is a wealth of opportunities for science graduates in industry, government, and in areas of applied science. The combination of a science degree and business and management education will give an added advantage to graduates in establishing careers within these practical fields.Faculty of Science websiteComputer Science websiteCurrent Ontario secondary school students must complete the Ontario Secondary School Diploma (OSSD) with six 4U or 4M credits including English (ENG4U), Advanced Functions (MHF4U), and one of Calculus and Vectors (MCV4U), Physics (SPH4U) or Computer Science (ICS4U). In addition, a combined minimum 70 per cent average in prerequisite computer science, math and science courses is required. It is recommended that all three MCV4U, ICS4U and SPH4U be taken. Note: Admission is competitive. The specific average or standing required for admission varies from year to year. Students are selected by taking into consideration a wide range of criteria including school marks, distribution of subjects taken, and performance in subjects relevant to the academic program. Possession of the minimum requirements does not guarantee acceptance. Preference will be given to applicants with the best qualifications.The application process and important dates/deadlines are outlined on our admissions website:• Ontario secondary school applicants• Ontario secondary school graduates • Canadian out-of-province high school applicants • international applicants• mature applicants (over 21 and never attended post-secondary)• transfer applicants• General Arts and Science (GAS) applicants • home-schooled applicantsA full program map is available in the Undergraduate Academic Calendar. Courses are subject to change without notice.A five-year Co-operative Education option is available in all of our Science programs (except for Forensic Science, which already has an embedded experiential component), all of which satisfy the guidelines of the Canadian Association for Co-operative Education. These five-year programs combine an Honours Bachelor of Science program with embedded work terms. The co-op option gives you opportunities to apply your classroom and lab concepts to real-world situations and help you gain valuable, relevant work experience to promote networking and lifelong career success.Co-op work terms give you the opportunity to earn a competitive salary that will help pay for your university degree and the work experience to help clarify your career objectives. More importantly, a co-op degree gives you a distinct advantage that will assist your prospects for full-time employment after graduation or for being readily accepted into graduate school to pursue further studies. Studies have shown that university students who graduate with a co-op degree have lower debt loads, are employed faster and have higher starting salaries.We are committed to providing you with outstanding opportunities to work with today’s highest-quality employers in business and industry. Our university has developed strong partnerships with leading employers in Durham Region and beyond to allow you to connect with experts in the field and gain hands-on, real-world experience.Computer Science opens the door to a variety of lucrative careers, including:An Honours undergraduate degree in Computer Science will also allow you to pursue graduate studies, including the university’s Master of Science program in Computer Science. HelpConnectVisitInfo2000 Simcoe Street NorthOshawa, Ontario L1G 0C5Canada905.721.8668Ontario Tech University is the brand name used to refer to the University of Ontario Institute of Technology.The university is proud to acknowledge the lands and people of the Mississaugas of Scugog Island First Nation which is covered under the Williams Treaties. We are situated on the Traditional Territory of the Mississaugas, a branch of the greater Anishinaabeg Nation which includes Algonquin, Ojibway, Odawa and Pottawatomi.© University of Ontario Institute of Technology . Ontario Tech and Design, and Tech with a Conscience are Official Marks of Ontario Tech University.